+++
title = "Working with Operating System Manager"
date = 2022-08-05T12:00:00+02:00
enableToc = true
+++

## Enable/Disable OSM

Starting with KubeOne 1.5, OSM will be enabled by default for new and existing clusters. This change will be applied upon running kubeone apply with `KubeOne 1.5` or newer

To fallback to legacy user-data from Machine Controller, we can disable OSM for a KubeOne cluster. Although this is not recommended for production environments because the legacy user-data is considered deprecated and will be removed in a future release.

```yaml
apiVersion: kubeone.k8c.io/v1beta2
kind: KubeOneCluster
versions:
  kubernetes: 1.23.6
addons:
  enable: true
operatingSystemManager:
  deploy: false
```

## Migrating existing MachineDeployments

{{% notice warning %}}
Existing MachineDeployments will not be rotated automatically. Existing MachineDeployment
should be rotated manually, for them to consume configurations generated by OSM.
{{% /notice %}}

To perform this rotation please follow the guide at [Rolling Restart MachineDeploments][rolling-restart].

OSM doesn't support using `cloud-init` as a provisioning utility for Flatcar machines. Flatcar use [coreos-cloudinit](https://github.com/coreos/coreos-cloudinit) instead of the upstream [cloud-init](https://cloud-init.io/). [coreos-cloudinit](https://github.com/coreos/coreos-cloudinit) is deprecated and its usage is not recommended in production environments.

With OSM enabled, for new MachineDeployments the provisioningUtility will be defaulted to `ignition`, if `cloud-init` is not specified explicitly.

To migrate existing MachineDeployments, make sure that you either leave the provisioningUtility field blank or set it to `ignition` explicitly.

```yaml
apiVersion: cluster.k8s.io/v1alpha1
kind: MachineDeployment
metadata:
  name: << MACHINE_NAME >>
  namespace: kube-system
spec:
  replicas: 1
  strategy:
    type: RollingUpdate
    rollingUpdate:
      maxSurge: 1
      maxUnavailable: 0
  selector:
    matchLabels:
      name: << MACHINE_NAME >>
  template:
    metadata:
      labels:
        name: << MACHINE_NAME >>
    spec:
      providerSpec:
        value:
          cloudProvider: "aws"
          cloudProviderSpec:
            region: "eu-central-1"
            availabilityZone: "eu-central-1a"
            vpcId: "vpc-name"
            subnetId: "subnet-id"
            instanceType: "t2.micro"
            instanceProfile: "kubernetes-v1"
            isSpotInstance: false
            diskSize: 50
            diskType: "gp2"
            ebsVolumeEncrypted: false
            ami: "my-custom-ami"
          operatingSystem: flatcar
          operatingSystemSpec:
            # 'provisioningUtility` is only used for flatcar os, can be set to ignition or cloud-init. Defaults to ignition.
            provisioningUtility: ignition
      versions:
        kubelet: "<< KUBERNETES_VERSION >>"
```

## Using custom OperatingSystemProfile

The annotation `k8c.io/operating-system-profile` is used at the MachineDeployment level to select the Operating System Profile that will be used to generate configurations for provisioning the machines.

### When creating a new cluster using Terraform

For new clusters, a dedicated terraform variable `initial_machinedeployment_operating_system_profile` was introduced for this purpose. It'll propagate the specified value to the initial MachineDeployments in the cluster.

It can be used as follows:

1. Create a custom OSP and place it in a folder inside your custom addons path, if it exists, otherwise create one. Let's take this minimalistic OSP as an example:

```yaml
apiVersion: operatingsystemmanager.k8c.io/v1alpha1
kind: OperatingSystemProfile
metadata:
  name: osp-install-curl
  namespace: kube-system
spec:
  osName: "ubuntu"
  osVersion: "20.04"
  version: "v1.0.0"
  supportedCloudProviders:
    - name: "aws"
  bootstrapConfig:
    files:
      - path: /opt/bin/bootstrap
        permissions: 755
        content:
          inline:
            encoding: b64
            data: |
              #!/bin/bash

              apt update && apt install -y curl jq

      - path: /etc/systemd/system/bootstrap.service
        permissions: 644
        content:
          inline:
            encoding: b64
            data: |
              [Install]
              WantedBy=multi-user.target

              [Unit]
              Requires=network-online.target
              After=network-online.target
              [Service]
              Type=oneshot
              RemainAfterExit=true
              ExecStart=/opt/bin/bootstrap

    modules:
      runcmd:
        - systemctl restart bootstrap.service

  provisioningConfig:
    files:
      - path: /opt/hello-world
        permissions: 644
        content:
          inline:
            encoding: b64
            data: echo "hello world"
```

**NOTE:** This is just for demonstration purposes and the custom OSPs would most likely be more complicated than this.

2. Create your infrastructure

```bash
terraform apply -var=initial_machinedeployment_operating_system_profile=osp-install-curl
```

The variable `initial_machinedeployment_operating_system_profile` can also be configured using `terraform.tfvars`.

3. Now create your cluster and make sure that you are using the custom addons folder.

```yaml
apiVersion: kubeone.k8c.io/v1beta2
kind: KubeOneCluster
versions:
  kubernetes: "1.22.5"
cloudProvider:
  aws: {}
addons:
  enable: true
  path: "./custom-addons"
```

**NOTE:** The path for addons can be anything. But make sure that the custom OSP exists in that directory.

### For new MachineDeployments

Create a new MachineDeployment and make sure that you add the `k8c.io/operating-system-profile` annotation with the required OSP name.

### For an existing Cluster

For existing MachineDeployments; edit the MachineDeployment and add `k8c.io/operating-system-profile` annotation with the required OSP name.

{{% notice warning %}}Secrets and OSC against the MachineDeployment will be created right away when we add this annotation. But the existing MachineDeployments will not be rotated automatically.
Existing MachineDeployment should be rotated manually, for them to consume configurations generated by OSM.
{{% /notice %}}

To perform this rotation for existing MachineDeployments please follow the guide at [Rolling Restart MachineDeploments][rolling-restart].

## Additional Information

- An update to `OperatingSystemProfile` will not result in an automatic rotation of the machines. This is an intentional design decision since an `OperatingSystemProfile` can be associated with multiple MachineDeployments. It is the user's responsibility to rotate the machines when the `OperatingSystemProfile` is updated. To perform this rotation for existing MachineDeployments please follow the guide at [Rolling Restart MachineDeploments][rolling-restart].

[rolling-restart]: {{< ref "../../../cheat-sheets/rollout-machinedeployment" >}}
